now that we went over the basics of how to
handle values with notes and also saw some procedural noises.
We can start creating actual shapes and patterns from scratch shapes and
patterns in general are the very foundation of most procedural shakers.
So it is important to have a certain sense of how to handle them before.
We have only been working with a single dimension for shapes,
we will have to use multiple dimensions.
This is where it can get complicated easily.
There are a couple of universal ways to generate shapes
that I want to recommend and explain here in general what
defines a shape are the lines that follow a constant value
and in particular the path where the value is zero.
So manipulating gradients depending on the location
is the best way to define shapes
when you have a gradient, like simply the why component of a coordinate vector,
you can easily create a straight edge by just using a math notes said
to greater than that separates the areas below and above a certain value.
Now it's time to introduce a second dimension
and manipulate the profile of that edge.
Let's grab the X. Component as well.
And combined with the white component using a subtract operation
as you can see the angle of the edge has changed.
What happened is that the edge that we previously
had is shifted depending on the X coordinate.
When I now manipulate that shift value.
With another math note,
you can see that I get complete control over the resulting edge
but as I've shown before,
there are more methods to control values than just the math node.
If for example, I take an RgB curves note to manipulate the shift value,
I get direct control over the resulting profile off the edge.
But the RgB curves note operates in the range between zero and one.
So the shape control is bound to this quarter of the plane here
where both used coordinates are in that range,
but that can be changed by remapping the range of the values that are used.
The easiest way to do that is using the map range note,
we can just remap the X coordinate that goes into the curves.
Note from the range minus 1 to 1
of the object coordinate space
20-1
where the curves note operates
now we just have to remap the other coordinate the same way.
But here I will use the math node set to multiply add and put both inputs 2.5.
That has the exact same effect as the map range.
Note, in this case it is just using different inputs.
But other than changing the range,
there is another useful way of re mapping the values that can be applied here.
If I switch the multiply add operation with absolute
you can see that the shape is being mirrored
to the other side networks because the absolute operation
flips all negative values around zero to be positive,
creating the same gradient mirrors like this.
So you can think of using the absolute operation
on incoming coordinates just as the mirror modifier.
We will see similar analogies of operations in the following chapters.
A useful way to generate approximately circular shapes.
Is using polar coordinates.
These instead of giving you information about the position
of a point on the X and the Y
axis are based on the distance to the origin or radius and the angle of the direction.
There is an easy way to calculate these coordinates.
You can get the angle by just simply using the
architect into operation on the X and the Y coordinate.
You can see that this creates this circular gradient around the
origin but the resulting angle is in radiance where a full rotation
is two pi and here it goes from negative pi to
positive pi which is not that useful for us right now.
But you can easily remap this range of 0 to 1.
Using the map range note, You can simply type in pie and -9, blending,
knows how to translate this into a number.
The radius is simply the length of the coordinate vector,
which we can easily get with a vector math node.
But we need to be careful here This way
all three components are considered for the radius.
What usually want with polar coordinates is for the radius to be independent
from the zet component that translates into
cylindrical coordinates opposed to spherical coordinates.
So what I do for that is just to create a combined X, Y,
Z node and grab only the X and the Y component to detach the zet component right now
we are only operating on a plane where the
component is zero so it doesn't really matter.
But when you're using a three dimensional coordinate space,
it can be important to specify this.
Now that we have the information about the radius and the angle.
We can use that to generate circular shapes.
That works just the same way as with the Cartesian coordinates, X and Y.
Just manipulate the angle with an RgB curves.
Note and subtract that from the radius.
You can see that the shifting works a bit differently here.
Now you can shift the distance of the edge from
the center along the radius depending on the angle.
If you want the shape to be closed,
you have to make sure that the starting point
and the endpoint are both at the same level.
Also with polar coordinates, it can be very useful to mirror the shape here.
I will just make sure that the angle starts in a negative range. Again
by defining the mapping minimum at zero.
So it ranges from negative 12 positive one
and then apply the absolute operation to that.
And now we can create the shape more easily with a mirrored function.
When I zoom in very closely in here,
you can see the same stepping artifacts that I pointed
out in the previous chapter on the procedural portrait.
These are artifacts caused by using the RGB curves.
Note, they don't appear when instead using only math nodes for example.
But the major benefit of the RGB curves note is
that they are very intuitive and easy to use.
Also the stepping artifacts are very minor and it
is a valid option to use the RGB curves.
Note when you just want simple control
a lot of the time, you don't actually want your shape to having a hard edge like that.
So rather than using the greater than operation,
you can just replace it with a subtraction
with that. We still have gradual information of the difference between both maps
to increase the hardness of this edge.
You can just simply multiply the gradient by a factor.
Then you can still clamp it to get a mask between zero and one.
You can see that the length of this fade is
not the same over the whole shape and that is due
to the way that the shape is created and it
depends on the slope of the curve that you use.
You might think that it should be easy to
just fade the edge by applying a blur operation.
But due to the vector based nature of the shading system,
an operation like that is not all that simple.
I will touch on and work around on that topic at the end of this chapter